Testing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
This is Yancey Carruthers.
Yancey Carruthers.
Captain in the Army.
Reservist or regularist?
Yes, reservist.
I joined the reserves in 1988.
I see.
And how long on active duty?
I didn't do any active duty time.
I've been a reservist the whole time.
This is my second mobilization.
I did a mobilization at Fort Riley, Kansas with the training division.
This being the second time around, I landed over here about five months ago.
When were you called up to active duty?
This time?
27th of September.
Second time to Iraq?
This is the first time in Iraq.
It's the second time being mobilized.
I see.
The first time I was mobilized, I went to Kansas with the training division, and we helped mobilize all the other units that were coming over here for OIF-1.
And what was your civilian occupation?
I'm an emergency room nurse.
Wow.
Have everyone you trained for this?
Well, I first started working in the emergency room at Ozarks Medical Center, the place that donated all the books.
That was 2001.
I originally started training as a nurse in 1992 in Waynesville, Missouri, and I just continued my education little pieces at a time.
I'm currently an RN, and I work in that emergency department.
Okay, so now you don't have a health care type job here with the Army.
You're in public affairs.
No, I work for the Coscom Surgeon Section here.
I see.
The Surgeon Section owns two of the offices in the Public Affairs building, so we're kind of tenants here.
Oh, yeah, so you don't work.
Right, I don't work for Colonel McManus.
I'm sorry.
See, he just told me I've got to talk to you, and I'm through a day.
Right, and we've been in the same building for several months.
So you basically occupy space that adjoins space?
Right, we just share.
So how did you get brought into this book?
Well, my book project started back in November in Baghdad.
Okay, so it's unrelated to this one here.
Right.
Okay.
It started out, I heard a presentation there that talked about how Iraqi doctors learn medicine in English.
So, uh... I'm sorry, how they what?
How Iraqi doctors what?
They learn medicine in English.
So they speak English and they read English.
And they actually prefer having their medical textbooks in English.
You just learned that while you were here.
I learned that when I was in Baghdad.
And there was an ongoing project that was going on to provide medical reference text to Iraqi healthcare clinics all over the country.
Well, I contacted the person that gave this presentation, and she basically told me, you know, I have several of these projects going on right now.
If you want to be involved in this, what I would suggest is that you talk to the local civil affairs folks, which was Captain Wormstadt.
She was in the very end of the video there, and her owner said you'd meet her today.
I hope she gets a chance to come in.
Wonderful.
She connected me with the Blob Hospital, because that's in her area of
her work area.
She is the liaison between all kinds of different Iraqi agencies, and that was one of them.
So once the two of us connected, she said, yes, there's a need for those.
You've got to go see the medical library.
You need to go meet Dr. Kossam and see the hospital.
How do you spell Kossam?
Q-A-S-S-I-N.
Okay.
But she was able to say, you know, yes, there is a need.
So at that point, I contacted Suzanne Smith, who was the medical librarian back at, back home, back at the Ozarks Medical Center.
S-U-Z or S-U-S?
S-U-Z-A-N-N-E.
Okay.
And at some point, Captain, just give me your email address.
Sure.
Do you have a card?
I don't have a card, but I can, I can write that probably faster.
Why don't you just write it right for you?
Good.
And just keep talking when you... Sure.
once I contacted Suzanne she said you know I wanted to see if there was some interest back home and you wanted to see if there was some interest right I wanted to see if they would collect some books and send them over here because I had the contact I knew that I could use them if I could get them and the response that I got
was just overwhelming.
I was really expecting that they would send, you know, maybe a couple of boxes of some books that these guys could use.
And what they sent was 20 boxes of medical texts.
I had them stacked all the way up.
Oh, that's fabulous.
And there were over 150 textbooks, medical textbooks.
Which is exactly what they wanted.
Right.
I mean, hard bound stuff.
And then over 300 medical reference journals.
to the periodical stuff.
This is serious stuff.
This is great.
It really is.
And about the same time as I got the contact with Suzanne back home, I was able to go out and do a site visit at the hospital.
I went out to see, you know, what it was all about.
I met Dr. Cossum.
Very polite people when you meet him.
He gave me a tour of the hospital.
He showed me the different departments.
I got to see the medical library as it existed at that time.
A lot of the books were really old.
They used photocopies of actual medical reference textbooks.
They'll have a stack of photocopies that they used.
Some of the things that they had were, they looked like they were older than me.
So, you know, I knew that at that point that there was a need.
I had established a relationship with Dr. Cosim and said, hey, this is a project that I'm working on.
And the books arrived shortly after that.
And this is about when?
This was late January when we first went out.
06.
of this year.
And you arrived here again when?
September?
I arrived here in mid-October.
I came on active duty in September.
So you put the same together in a couple of months, really.
Really did.
The project really started about the 1st of December.
And it took a little while to collect the books back home and maybe six weeks just to get all of them together because we have over a thousand employees at the hospital.
So they put out this mass email to everyone.
That's great.
It is.
It's great.
I'd like to contact Suzanne back at the hospital.
I can give you... Actually, this is her contact number right here.
It's the beauty of digital cameras.
You know, it is.
It is.
Let me look on this board here.
I don't think there's anything else on that board that's particularly sensitive anyway.
This is what I have right here.
But it was great.
When we delivered the books, this was March the 10th that we actually made the delivery.
and Dr. Kassim had assembled his team of physicians there in the medical library for the presentation.
I wasn't really expecting any kind of a ceremony, but we were able to present the books, and the docs would come up and take a look at the books, and then they would take one, and then they would maybe pass it across the table, and they were really excited.
There was a lot of excitement, really seeing exactly what they had.
and they're all looking for something.
A pediatrician's looking for the American Journal of Pediatrics, and when he finds that, you know, it's just, okay, I'm going to take these and put them over my little pile.
It's great.
Well, are they going to have one central library over there, or are these going to... See, they have a library now.
They have the facility for it.
They have some nice shelving, some brand new shelving, but the books that were on it were just not adequate.
Isn't that a great...
Now, are you going to try?
It's too bad you can't get stuff like this going with some of the... You know, this was a neat project for me.
It was a lot of personal satisfaction because it wasn't really part of my job.
It wasn't something that I had to do in order to be doing my job.
But it was something I kind of took on as a side project.
But it really felt like that... And obviously with the...
It made me feel like I was doing something over here that I had actually made a little bit of a difference with what we're trying to do.
It was very important to me that
not just someone in my position had affected the change, but this is something that I personally feel like I have a great sense of accomplishment.
So did you kind of have a sense that they needed the books, or was this just something that... See, I didn't realize that they needed them at all until I heard, because I'm very new to the Middle Eastern culture, never been over here before, but when I heard that
that Iraqi doctors spoke English and that there was a shortage of medical reference textbooks, I thought, you know, I work with hundreds of doctors that have probably got these things laying around their garage or put up on the shelf somewhere, and if we can get things that are five years old, that is so much more modern than what the Iraqi doctors have access to.
In a lot of these books, the material really doesn't degrade.
Sometimes it's just the, you know,
A book can only be flipped through so many times before it's just torn up.
To know that they use these photocopies, that stuff is just not going to last.
And this is not the type of stuff they can get online either, right?
You know, they probably could, but these books are expensive.
Very similar to college textbooks.
That's right.
You're absolutely right.
You have to subscribe to the journals.
It's going to be $20,000 a year.
Sure.
In some instances, some of these journals are very expensive.
It's something that the Ministry of Health provides all the things that they need in the hospital.
However, just as in the United States, with
Medicare or insurance companies or that sort of thing.
There's a priority against that.
First, you have to have medical supplies, medical equipment.
Medical reference books are further down on the list of priorities.
They're needed, but in the eyes of a lot of officials, they're not needed as badly as some of the other things.
Sure.
Do you realize if everyone, how many hospitals are there in Iraq?
This is something you did for one hospital.
This hospital serves the town of Balad, which is 75,000 people, but it also serves the surrounding area.
Their area influence includes about 300,000 in the population.
It's a very small hospital.
Did you give me the name of the hospital?
It's Balad General Hospital.
Balad General Hospital.
That's what they call themselves.
You must feel pretty good about this.
I do.
I really feel great about this project.
This was a really neat project, and one of the things, I think, that made it even more interesting, if I can find it for you, this right here is a translated copy of a press release that was put out by the Iraqi media.
May I have a copy?
Yes, I'm printing out a copy right now.
The gentleman's name was Sabah Abazi, and I may get you wrong.
It is, it is.
He was an Iraqi reporter that was there
to cover this event.
I mean, completely independent of everything that we were doing, this Iraqi reporter was here to cover this.
And some of his information that he got on that is not entirely correct, like 101.
I don't know what 101 means.
It's not part of our unit designator, but yet he reported some things that weren't entirely accurate.
But he did get a good concept of the story, that it was something that was a cooperative effort between the doctors in Balad and the soldiers here.
which I think that's really the most important thing when we're dealing with the Iraqis, is that there was a cooperative effort, and we are doing something good with them.
He sent me this via email, and then I had it translated from Civil Affairs, and he told me that it would be, basically would travel from here northward, so it would end up in cities like Mosul and Kirkuk.
He's not a newspaper reporter, I thought he was initially,
He speaks fair English, but it was pretty difficult to communicate with him, and I misunderstood that.
I think he's some kind of a broadcast journalist, maybe radio, but he took some digital photos, too.
So I'm not really sure if it's going to end up maybe as a little TV spot somewhere.
So this just happened, really?
This was last Friday.
And when did the books come in?
The books came in the latter part of January.
We were gone.
We were out in Al-Asad, out west.
And then they came right before we went to Al-Asad.
So then we were out there for a week.
It takes a little bit of time to arrange a trip to do this kind of thing.
So we needed the inventory of the books.
We didn't know how long that was going to take because, again, this was a side project.
There are normal, everyday things that I have to do as well.
But we were able to set a date
on the 10th of March to get this done.
So what's next for you in the book area?
Well, OMC has indicated that they are willing to do a little more.
OMC again?
Ozarks Medical Center.
They had another physician, one that I've worked with for several years, that he came up with three or four more boxes of textbooks that he wanted to donate to the cause.
And now it's very targeted.
I know that
based on the initial shipment of what they sent and what the capabilities are, I know I need pediatric books.
I know I need neurosurgery books.
So now it's narrowed to four different fields.
We had great response in the surgery area, great response in the emergency area, family practice.
So those physicians, they have the reference text that they need now, but there were a few that
We sent two pediatrics references to the pediatrician, so we're going to try to increase those specific areas, and they're going to try to buy a few books and then try to target the collections at this point.
I can probably expect there will be another shipment April or May.
I don't know how large it's going to be, so I haven't made any promises to the Iraqis yet about what more will be coming.
I will get a second shot.
I'll get something in the Los Angeles Times about this.
Really?
This is a great story in my view.
Congratulations.
I'm very impressed.
Appreciate it.
It would just be so nice if we could get some of your colleagues to pick up on this example and try and do what you have done for the general hospital and other hospitals throughout Iraq.
It is so important that we...
not only do we have a good relationship with the Iraqis, because that's what this is all about, but that we don't just help them, we give them the tools that they need to help themselves.
And that's where this medical reference book project is just so effective, because I haven't really done anything for them, but I've given them the tools that they need to help themselves,
So there's a little difference.
You know, teach a man to fish versus give a man to fish.
And that's very important.
But not just that, the attention of the Iraqi media.
That will have an effect on what we're trying to do here.
The Iraqi public opinion, obviously, is very important.
And what happens if we get a national exposure on this?
I mean, all of a sudden, people around the United States want to give books.
What happens then, if that should happen?
You know, if that should happen...
I'm sure there's a need in places.
Is somebody prepared to coordinate that here?
Do you understand what I'm saying?
I do.
That would be hard.
It's the kind of thing people would respond to.
It is.
There would be avenues to do that.
Of course, that would involve a needs assessment on a little bit larger scale than just a lot.
A little more than what I could do alone.
If there was a larger response, then
You know, I think we could figure out a good place to put some of these.
And how old are you, might I ask?
I'm 34.
Good for you.
Do you have family?
I do.
I do have a wife, three children.
And they live in?
All in Missouri.
A-L-T-O-N.
Great.
Great story.
How old are your kids?
You know, I always have to think about that because there's three of them and then they have birthdays.
My oldest daughter is 11.
What's her name?
Amory.
A-M-O-R-I-E.
And my middle daughter is Gabrielle.
She's seven.
And then Tabitha is five.
Three girls.
I got two girls myself.
And what's your voice name?
Melody.
Fabulous.
It's a great story.
Thanks.
Thank you for sharing it with me.
And will I be able to, well, I guess Brian will get me a copy of the CD that we watched earlier?
Yes, he can get a CD.
And I have a copy of the pictures if you have questions.
If we got a larger response to this, what that would involve is me coordinating with civil affairs units all over the country and determining exactly what the need was before any books were sent.
That would be really important because we wouldn't want to all of a sudden have a warehouse full of books and no need for them.
And also not focused.
Right.
It would have to be focused on, hey, this is exactly what we need.
Because in some of these things, you know, you have to make sure you have an outlet.
And that's the way I did it this time, is I made sure that I had a place to go with him.
And then at that point, I already knew that there was some interest back home.
But I said, hold off.
I'm doing anything until I can get the connections made.
And then once I knew what the need was, I said, yes, there's a need.
This can be used.
You know, go ahead, green light.
And so it would all have to be, a larger effort would have to be done the same way to make sure that you had a focused effort on the facilities that needed the most, needed the most help.
And what's the largest big city pavement there where you live?
I'm not really close to anything.
South Missouri is kind of out there.
Springfield need leader maybe.
St.
Louis, of course St.
Louis, Kansas City, there are some people that get those.
We have a little local paper there in West Plains.
It helps us out so much because not only are we helping the Iraqis, we're getting some good public exposure here to the Iraqis.
And I think it's also so important that the American people know that everything they hear on the news, sometimes, I mean, you know how this works, and being a member of the media, sometimes the good stories, something like this, this is not news.
This is something that is a great story, but if it happens this week or next week or the week after, it's not really time-sensitive.
It's a good story.
Well, you do have an angle that something would happen.
Sure.
You know, but as far as a helicopter crash is news.
I mean, it's right then, it just happened.
You know, so you hear about so many bad things, and I think it's important, especially, you know, because there's so many troops that are over here, you know, that the support of the troops is important.
And so I think it's important that the American public knows that, you know, we are over here, we are doing some good things, and the Iraqis are making progress.
And did you have the support of your superiors on this?
one of my military superiors.
They were in the conference with that guy with me.
So I introduced the idea to the COSCOM surgeon and he just kind of let me run with it.
We have a really good working environment over here.
Each of us, we have a dietician who's in other medical operations planning and we all have our little projects that we're working on.
So there's a degree of autonomy in our jobs.
So there's a lot of support from that from my boss.
It says, you know, hey, this sounds like a great project.
This is something we want to do.
And, you know, there are some, there are maybe even some other good things that can come out of this because of our improved relationship.
What's your brother's name?
Colonel Christensen.
Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Last name Christensen, C-H-R-I-S-T-E-N-S-E-N.
check it out if that's an email maybe i'd like to get a quote from him if not now when i get back he will be around here sometime today so all right i think so thank you um i'll be in touch sure can you work for the so why don't you just tell me i'm talking with captain come on
Okay.
This is Captain... I'm Captain Lana Wormstatt.
Lana Wormstatt.
And you are... Just tell us your name.
Just tell me your name.
Would you just say it?
Captain Ahmed.
I-H-M-A-G.
Okay.
And your first... That's his first name?
First name.
And your... And your... Second name.
Hikmat.
H-A-K-A-M.
And you have... You wrote it down there for me.
Yep.
So...
Colonel McNerdy tells me that you're involved in his book project.
That's correct, sir.
And Mike, could you just tell me a little bit about it, and your particular involvement?
Well, I'm a civil affairs team leader out at Bob Palawada, the Balada area.
What did you call it?
Bob Palawada.
P-A-L-I.
Can you just see me trying to spell that out on the tape?
Well, it's named after a soldier that was killed there on January 24, 2004, Captain Palawada.
Can you write it down for me?
Good.
Roger, sir.
I go to Palo Alto.
And so what I do is I do civil affairs.
I do deal with infrastructure projects.
And how I came to be is I met with Captain Crothers.
And he took him out to the Blatt Hospital.
Because he said he's also a nurse.
Now I'm a nurse in the civilian world.
And he said he wanted this project of raising medical books if possible to get to the Blatt Hospital.
So I said I'd take him out there, show him what the blood hospital has, does not have, because as a nurse, he could truly appreciate the needs of any person.
So I took him out to the blood hospital.
He met Dr. Cosman, the director of the hospital, and showed him around the hospital, the needs.
And then Captain Crothers actually has done all the groundwork.
I just took him out there and brought him back and took him out there again for delivery.
And they raised...
143 medical books and over 350 medical journals.
And then we took them out there and delivered them.
And then it's been a great mission.
So you were the facilitator.
Ah, yes, I got the facilitator.
And tell me how you work with Captain Achmed.
Captain Achmed, he's the company commander of 4th Company, 3rd Battalion, 4th Infantry Division for the Iraqi Army.
He's also the civil affairs officer for the battalion, so he's my counterpart.
Whenever we go out on missions, patrols, check-in projects, infrastructure, deal with government leadership, anything.
I mean, yesterday we did a school project where we dropped off some canvases and paint.
His soldiers help out with that, provide security along with my soldiers.
We've been working together since I've been here.
What is your regular daily duty?
My job is civil military operations that deal with any infrastructure issues such as sewer, water, electricity, academics, agriculture, transportation, medical, fuel, you name it.
Is there anything that deals with Iraqi people I'm involved with in making their life better?
or providing assistance, and not necessarily doing it for them, but helping them to help themselves facilitate, and then finding different avenues to do things, different funding that's come down.
We do projects.
I'm shy.
Very nice.
Now, did you know about the need for books, or is this something that Kevin Carruthers basically generated?
Well, part of my job, when a civil affairs team arrives in any location to take over their AO, they do an assessment.
And so within the first week of arriving at Bob Palawada in Bilod, I went to the hospital and met with Dr. Cosman for the first time, director of the hospital.
I sat down with him and found out what the needs and the wants are of the hospital.
He showed me around, did an assessment.
He showed me the library.
The library is pretty sad.
It would not even come close to the standards that we have in the U.S.
or many other countries.
Many of the books are 10 to 20 years old.
They don't have covers or they're copies of books.
They're copies of copies.
Sometimes they're not up to date.
The newest book might be 1998, 1999.
That's ancient medicine, that's ancient history.
It is, and so they can't keep up.
And these doctors are very good doctors.
They are trained down in Baghdad, just about all of them.
They use the British system.
They know English, maybe not as fluent as we are, but many of them speak very, very well.
They're very efficient doctors.
They have a neurosurgeon there who is brilliant.
He's up to the power of our neurosurgeons.
It's just that a doctor can only do as well as when he asks for equipment and supplies.
And keeping up to date with the different, you know, technology that medical has, you know, how medicine changes so fast.
I mean, it's hindering.
But if they have the knowledge, they can practice this along with if they have the equipment.
So Captain Crothers has really done an excellent job with getting the books for him.
They're happy, extremely happy.
Now how long have you been on active duty?
I'm in the reserve.
My unit's actually out of Abilene, Texas.
So I'm a filler on this rotation.
The unit that I'm filling in with...
It's out of Mountain View, California, and they're short, so I volunteered to go with them.
So I'm filling this, and I'll be done in May or June.
And what's your day job?
I'm an ER trauma nurse.
And where?
In Texas?
In Texas, yes, sir.
Where in Texas?
Temple, Texas, Scott and White.
And that is where in this huge state?
It's right next to Fort Hood, basically.
It's on I-35 next to Fort Hood.
And when did you join up?
Oh, 1985.
It'll be 21 years in June.
No kidding.
Yeah, I came in when I was enlisted.
I did nine years enlisted.
And what was the motivation at that point?
Well, I knew I wasn't ready for college, and I wanted the college money, and I wanted to travel, and I had a really good Army recruiter.
And I got Germany, went to Germany for two years.
Ended up in the Army, stayed for another three years, re-enlisted for another three years.
And then I got out to go to nursing school because I knew it was in seventh grade.
And this is about when did you get out?
I got out in August 90, and I joined the National Guard.
Ninety days later, I was back off for Desert Shield, Desert Storm.
So I came to Saudi Arabia and came into Iraq.
This is the first time?
Yes, Desert Storm.
I came from Desert Storm.
And then I came back, finished up nursing school.
My last year at nursing school, went through OCS, got my commission.
I went to Navy OCS a long time ago.
I went to South Dakota OCS program, and I took my branch transportation.
I didn't want to be a nurse in the military.
I love traveling.
I like being outside, doing stuff.
They want the jobs to be the same.
So I did transportation, the core master of logistics, and then I decided I wanted to do some different civil affairs.
And so when you were called up again for this?
Yes, sir.
And when was that?
I got called up in March of 2005.
How did you feel about that?
I was excited.
I've got the best job in the Army.
Do you have a family?
Yes, I have two children.
And they're back in Texas?
No, well, one is.
One's in Texas.
He's going to be a grandmother in August.
Yeah, I know.
That smile.
No, I'm excited.
And my other son is with my sister at Fort Gordon.
He's a senior in high school.
He'll graduate in May.
My brother-in-law stationed at Fort Gordon.
What are your boy's names?
Adrian and Aaron.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
They must be very proud of you.
Yeah.
They were little.
I mean, they remember when I left for Desert Storm.
So when Mom's been in the military for so long, it's just, you know.
And you shouldn't ask a lady her age, but... 38.
See?
Did you hear that, Ahmed?
You don't ask a woman her age.
But unfortunately, with these...
So how much time active duty have you got altogether?
Must be 10 years?
10, 11 years.
I'll stay in until they kick me out.
I love it.
So you think you're going to stay active now?
Well, I'll be in the reserves.
I'll go back.
I'm actually slated to go to Arabic school at DLI.
I took the D-Lab test.
So when I come back, I'll be going to Arabic school when they get me a slide.
Good to you.
Excellent.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
I think we have plenty.
That's right.
I think I have plenty of information.
Okay.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Good luck to you with your country and working with a terrific lady here.
Did you hear that?
Testing, one, two, three, four.
Test, test, test, test, test, test, test, test, test.